ANNE SEXTON

Born November 9, 1928 - death by suicide at age 46.
Known as the modern model of the confessional poet, Anne Sexton trained under
Robert Lowell with such contemporaries as Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes.

Sexton's signature style was highly personal and confessional verse that detailed
her own struggles with mental illness, marriage, sex and
addiction. Her work conveyed an intimacy considered scandalous
for the time which subjected her to a great deal of scrutiny and criticism. She
wrote of struggle and torment in an effort to keep herself alive and in the
world.

Anne Sexton began writing as an adult on the advice of a therapist and a
priest -  within 10 years she had already won the Pulitzer and established
herself as both a cautionary tale of self-destruction and artistic creation.

This data set contains 14 poems and 3127 individual words.

LANGSTON HUGHES

Born February 1, 1902 - Langston Hughes was a notable leader of the
Harlem Rennaisance and wrote throughout this era in a variety of
formats. One of the earliest innovators of a literary art form known as
"jazz poetry" Langston incorporated the syncopated rhythms and
repetitve phrasing of blues and jazz into his work.

Jazz poetry was conceived in the 1920's by African Americans and maintained
during the 1950's by the Beat Generation. Jazz poetry has adapted into modern
times as hip-hop/poetry slams.

This data set contains 24 poems and 2457 individual words.

PABLO NERUDA

Pablo Neruda was the pen name for Neftali Ricardo Reyes Basoalso, born
July 12, 1904 in Chile. Pablo began writing as a teenager and often in
green ink, his personal symbol for desire and hope. Although his work
covered a variety of topics, he is most famous for his collection
"Twenty Love Poems and a Song of Despair" which established Neruda as a
"frank, sensuous spokesman for love." He equated women with nature raised to
the cosmic degree, and contextualized the women in his life into veritable
forces of the universe. His style was rich and varied.

Fiercely devoted to communism, he occupied a number of diplomatic positions and
won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1971.

This data set contains 16 poems and 3211 individual words.

ADRIENNE RICH

AUDRE LORDE





