ANNE SEXTON

era 1950 - 1970's

The modern model of the confessional poet,
Anne Sexton began writing as an adult on the advice of a therapist and a
priest -  within 10 years she had already won the Pulitzer Prize and established
herself as both a cautionary tale of self-destruction and artistic genius.

Anne Sexton's signature style was highly personal verse that detailed
her struggles with mental illness, suicide, adultery, sex and
addiction. Her work conveyed an intimacy considered scandalous
for the time and largely untouched by poetic discourse.

This data set contains 14 poems and 3127 individual words.


LANGSTON HUGHES

era 1920 - 1960's

A notable leader of the Harlem Renaissance, Langston Hughes is known for his
insights and portrayal of black life in America. Hughes distinguished himself
with his literary reflections on black culture,
and sought to write about life in a way that reflected the entirety of black
experience including both societal suffering and a love of language and music.

One of the earliest innovators of a literary art form known as "jazz poetry",
Langston's style incorporated syncopated rhythms and repetitive musical phrasing
into his work. Jazz poetry became the basis for the work of the Beat Generation
and has evolved into modern
times as hip-hop.

This data set contains 24 poems and 2457 individual words.


PABLO NERUDA

era 1930's - 1960's

Pablo Neruda was the pen name for Neftali Ricardo Reyes Basoalso, born
July 12, 1904 in Chile. Pablo began writing as a teenager and often in
green ink, his personal symbol for desire and hope. Although his work covered
a variety of topics, he is most famous for his poetic musings on love.

Pablo Neruda's signature style was rich and varied but often thematically oriented towards love and nature. He equated the women he loved with forces of nature and often represented them
poetically as powerful forces raised to the cosmic degree.

This data set contains 16 poems and 3211 individual words.


ADRIENNE RICH

era 1950's - 1970's

Widely regarded as one of the most influental poets of modern times, Adrienne Rich's work brought the patriarchal oppression
of women into the forefront of poetic discourse.

Adrienne Rich's signature style was marked by explorations of lesbian sexuality and desire, as well as constructions of gender and identity.  An intellectual powerhouse, Rich was one of the first poets to address and incorporate the theme of lesbian existence and sexual equality. Rich's work was a demonstration of the ways in which poetry can serve to dissolve societal isolation and validate the beauty of the social and sexual outlaw.


AUDRE LORDE

era 1950's - 1980's

A Caribbean-American born radical, Audre Lorde combined elements of social liberalism and sexuality to express and explore her identity as a black, feminist, lesbian woman. Lorde's literary themes often involved racism, patriarchy and sexual invisibility.

Lorde's signature style echoes her both her depth of feeling and intellectual rigor, emphasizing revolution and an emphasis on authenticity of experience. Her primary goal in writing was communication - a duty to share not only the triumphs of life, but also the intense often unmitigated pain of living.






